# Packages source tree

Packages artifacts in deb and RPM formats are built starting from source
archives. Fatbuildr follows strict principles to extract the source archives
into a deterministic and predictable source tree. These principles are designed
to help development of packaging code by making it consistent accross version
and formats and reduce maintenance cost over time eventually.

The principle applied by Fatbuildr to extract source archives are detailed in
this page to help package maintainers write optimal and resilient packaging
code for all types of sources archives.

[#mono]
## Common mono-source package

Most packages are based from a unique source archive, _ie._ the tarball that
contains the source tree as released by the software editor. A common good
practice followed by most software editors is to include a top-level directory
in the source archives. Unfortunately, this good practice is not strictly
applied in all released source archives. For this reason, Fatbuildr manages both
cases and always extract the source tree in a subfolder named
`<artifact>-<version>`, whatever the presence and the exact name of the
top-level folder in the editor source archive.

This principle is illustrated for an example artifact _foo_ in
xref:img-mono[xrefstyle=short] and xref:img-mono_wotl[xrefstyle=short] which
represent with and without top-level directory cases respectively.

image::source_tree_mono-source.svg[id=img-mono,width=400,title=Artifact *foo* with top-level directory in source archive]

image::source_tree_mono-source_wo_toplevel.svg[id=img-mono_wotl,width=400,title=Artifact *foo* _without top-level directory_ in source archive]

[#multi]
## Multi-sources packages

Fatbuildr natively supports building packages in deb and RPM formats using
multiple sources archives. Sources are declared in xref:repo.adoc#def[artifact
definition file] with a source identifier. The first source is considered as the
*_main_ source* and its identifier must match the artifact name. All other
sources are considered as *supplementary sources*.

For the _main_ source, Fatbuildr follows the same principle as for the
xref:mono[mono-source packages].

All the supplementary sources are extracted in a subfolder named after the
source archive filename in which all characters except alphanumericals and
hyphens (`-`) are removed. This table provides some examples:

[cols="1m,1m",width=50%]
|===
|Archive filename|Source subfolder

|bar-4.5.6.tar.gz
|bar-456

|bar-baz_4.5.6.zip
|bar-baz456

|bar-4.5.6~rc1_beta.tar.xz
|bar-456rc1beta
|===

NOTE: This subfolder renaming operation may seem weird and irrational at first
glance. It has been choosen for compatibility reason with Debian source packages
supplementary tarballs specifications which only supports alphanumeric and
hyphen characters for components names. Please refer to
https://git.dpkg.org/cgit/dpkg/dpkg.git/tree/scripts/Dpkg/Source/Package.pm#n406[`dpkg-source`
source code] for more details.

A symbolic link is created from the supplementary source identifier to the
versioned renamed subfolder (ex: `bar` â†’ `bar-456/`). This makes possible to
write packaging code with generic paths agnostic to version number changes.

NOTE: The symbolic links created for supplementary archives are integrated in
source packages in the form of a patch that is dynamically generated and
automatically integrated by Fatbuildr into the source package.

For similar reason to the main source archive, Fatbuildr is agnostic to the
presence of a top-level directory in the supplementary source archives. If it is
present, it is removed from the resulting source tree.

These principles are illustrated for an example artifact _foo_ with a _bar_
supplementary source in xref:img-multi[xrefstyle=short] and
xref:img-multi_wotl[xrefstyle=short] which represent with and without top-level
directory cases respectively.

image::source_tree_multi-sources.svg[id=img-multi,width=500,title=Artifact *foo* with *supplementary bar* source with top-level directories in all source archives]

image::source_tree_multi-sources_wo_toplevel.svg[id=img-multi_wotl,width=500,title=Artifact *foo* with *supplementary bar* source _without top-level directory_ in bar source archive]

[TIP]
====
To quickly figure out the source tree defined by Fatbuildr for a given
artifact with all principles mentioned above, it is possible to run
`fatbuildrctl patches` command with the artifact in argument:

[source,console]
----
$ fatbuildrctl patches --artifact foo
----

This command downloads the artifact source archives and extract them in a
temporary local directory (with a subshell and an initialized Git repository).

Please refer to xref:fatbuildrctl.adoc[`fatbuildrctl` manpage] for more details
about this command.
====
